---
layout: post
title: Writing a 2048 clone in elm
tags: 
    - unramblings
    - programming
toc: true
comments: true
---


Several weeks ago, I, along with the rest of the internet, discovered [2048](http://gabrielecirulli.github.io/2048/), a fascinating one player game based on powers of two. Although it has a simple premise, the game requires a complex set of carefully thought out non-linear strategies to win, in a way that makes it comparable to a Rubik's Cube, or the two player game Go.

There are many interesting mathematical questions one could ask about the game, both trivial and non-trivial. For example:

1. What is the least number of moves required to win?
1. What is the lowest possible score when the game is won?
1. What is the highest number of moves that can be carried out before a win?
1. What is the lowest possible score when the game is lost?
1. Is a win always guaranteed?

I intend to try to tackle some of these in another post. 

For now, I have applied my new found love for functional programming and created a clone of 2048 in elm. [Elm](http://elm-lang.org/) is a programming language based on Haskell that uses [Functional Reactive Programming](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_reactive_programming) to enable the creation of interactive applications, while keeping the language functional. 

Elm compiles to HTML, CSS and Javacript, and so is very easy to deploy &mdash; as a demonstration of this I have embedded the final product of this project below. Give it a try! (Remember to click on the game first, to allow it to attain your browser's focus.)

<center><iframe style="border: none; width: 560px; height: 680px;" src="http://scrambledeggsontoast.github.io/2048-elm/build/"></iframe></center>

I decided to write up the project to serve as a resource and a tutorial of sorts for those trying to get into FRP or elm. I am still learning about these topics myself, so if you notice anything that has been done in a suboptimal way do let me know. Also, this is the first time I have written a post like this of any significant length, so feedback with regards to that is also welcome.

The project [is on GitHub](https://github.com/ScrambledEggsOnToast/2048-elm). Feel free to submit pull requests if you want to fix any bugs, or indeed for any other appropriate reason. 

## Prerequisites and References

I expect you to at least have a working knowledge of functional programming, and preferably in the context of Haskell. If you do not, [Learn You a Haskell for Great Good!](http://learnyouahaskell.com/) can be [read online](http://learnyouahaskell.com/chapters) and is an excellent beginner's guide. If you are not comfortable with functors, monads, etc., you should still be able to follow this tutorial. Those concepts are not used in this project, and are not explicitly used in elm in general.

I don't expect you to have used elm before. The general syntax in elm is very similar to that of Haskell, with a few key differences. Of importance is the fact that while in Haskell ``::`` is the 'has type of' symbol, and ``:`` is the cons operator, in elm ``:`` is the 'has type of' symbol, and ``::`` is the cons operator. I will describe other differences as we encounter them. A useful syntax reference can be found [here](http://elm-lang.org/learn/Syntax.elm). The main difference in programming style between elm and Haskell is that elm uses *signals*, which are values that change with time. I will explain how these work and how to use them.

A key feature of elm is that an elm file can be compiled to a *component*, which can be embedded into an HTML document, and can communicate with Javascipt via *ports*. We will use take advantage of this in our project, but it does not matter if you are unfamiliar with HTML and Javascript, as they are not the focus.

If you have installed ``cabal-install``, elm can be installed with ``cabal install elm``. Compiling elm files is as easy as using ``elm Main.elm`` to generate a file ``build/Main.html``, which can be opened in a web browser. 

## Definition of the game

The board on which 2048 is played is a 4 by 4 grid of tiles. Tiles can either be empty, or contain an integer number that is a power of two. The initial board contains two random tiles in random positions. Each of these tiles has a 90% probability of being a 2, and a 10% probability of being a 4.

At any time, the player has the option to slide all of the tiles in the grid in one of four directions: up, down, left or right. The tiles slide naturally as expected, filling empty tiles with tiles that contain numbers, but also have an additional behaviour. If there are two adjacent non-empty tiles (in the direction of the slide) that hold the same value, then those two tiles merge together, forming a new tile whose value is the sum of the original two. If there are more than
two adjacent non-empty tiles holding the same value, this pairing is prioritised to be between those most in the direction specified &mdash; so sliding a grid with a row \\([2,2,2,8]\\) to the left would result in \\([4,2,8,0]\\), whereas sliding it to the right would result in \\([0,2,4,8]\\). After each slide, a new random tile (again 90% a 2, 10% a 4) is placed in one of the remaining empty tile positions.

## Project structure

## To the text editor

### Input Model

### Game Model

### Rendering

### Game Logic

### Putting it all together

{% highlight haskell %}
module Elm2048 where

import Window

import InputModel (Input, controls, randomFloats)
import GameModel (defaultGame)
import Logic (stepGame)
import Rendering (display)

port score : Signal Int -- Outgoing score port
port score = (\x -> x.score) <~ gameState

port newGameButton : Signal Bool -- Incoming new game button port

delta = fps 30 -- a signal determining the rate at which the game steps
input = sampleOn delta -- sample the input every time an event occurs in delta
            <| Input 
            <~ controls 
             ~ (randomFloats delta) 
             ~ newGameButton 

gameState = foldp stepGame defaultGame input -- fold the input into the game 
                                             -- state, starting with the 
                                             -- default game state

main = display <~ Window.dimensions ~ gameState -- display the game
{% endhighlight %}

## Done!

